#### Discourse on Method
---
#syst501 
2024-09-10, 09:51

---
NB:
 -  Notes for end of last class' notes have been integrated into that document.
### Theological method
1. Concerns about argument
	1. Rational argumentation
		1. Won't it undermine faith? Faith is of things not seen, etc.
		2. Immo! 
	2. Reliance on "authorities"
		1. Shouldn't draw on this kind of argument because of the height of the science.
		2. Immo!
2. Argument from reason - three forms
	1. Arguments from fittingness (opportet).  This does not prove truths, but emphasizes the harmony between truths -> it can be applied in a variety of contexts precisely because of its "looseness."  Not as helpful in speaking with those who are not of the faith.  This argument rather provides a greater clarity.
	2. Theological deduction.  This is a deduction from articles of faith.  Useful in apologetics (1 cor 15).  argument for causal relationships between articles of faith, and from articles of faith.
	3. Philosophical demonstration: preambles grasped by reason based upon the rational order.
3. Argument from authority - three forms
	1. Auctoritas specifies / implies the claim of the person more than the authoritative person
	2. Three kinds:
		1. Probative and proper claims
			1. Claims made by human authors of Sacred Scripture
			2. Claims implied in or by Sacred Tradition
			3. Infallible teachings of the Magisterium regarding faith and morals
		2. Probable and proper claims
			1. Claims by Doctores Ecclesiae
			2. Claims implied by ecclesial traditions
			3. non-definitive teachings of the Magesterium regarding faith and morals
			4. claims made by more recent theologians
		3. Probable and extrinsic claims
			1. Claims made by pagan philosophers still may be pertinent to sacred doctrine
	3. Hierarchy of authorities (see handout)

#def Theology: Reasoned(1) Study(2) about God and things in relation to God(3), on the basis of divine revelation(4), for the purpose of coming to a greater understanding of these things(5), and in turn a greater love(6).
1. ST1.q1.a5.ad2, a8.c,ad1,2
2. ST1.q1.a6.ad3; a8.ad2
3. ST1.q1.a3.ad1; a4c; a7c
4. ST1.q1.a1.ad2; a3c; a4c
5. ST1.q1.a4c; a5c
6. ST1.q1.a1c; q43; ST2a2ae.q45