1. Sunday Matins. First psalm in the psalter - The first three psalms of the psalter will be the first three psalms of the Pius X psalter. - The happiness of the just man contrasted with the punishments on the wicked.  This is a theme that will be repeated again and again throughout the psalter.  The just man is like a fruitful tree, the unjust like dust driven from the earth by wind.
2. Sunday Matins. Second psalm, also introductory - First mention of opposition between the King on Sion, the Lord's son, and the Gentiles / the people of the earth.  General layout: The vain but futile pride of the nations, a benediction of the Lord's anointed, a warning to those who rule of God's anger against undisciplined rulers

1-2 Reflection:  How would I write a preface for a mighty book of songs? It would seem out of place to begin with some prosaic epithets about the author, especially if he were of high regard.  David needs no introduction - these psalms introduce theme, not author.  The Law of the Lord brings life.  The wicked will perish.  The king is the Lord's son.  The world strives against the Almighty and His anointed one.  Live justly and fear the Lord!  These relatively terse verses sum up and prepare us to read all that is to come. 

3. Sunday Matins. Psalm of David - in flight from his third son, Absalom.  A petition to the Lord.  The psalmist notes his troubles - many enemies, and he is counted as without hope.  The psalmist then notes his trust in God - he sleeps soundly, he has no fear despite thousands of foes. Concludes noting God's just rewards to David's adversaries, and God's blessing on His people.
4. Sunday compline. Psalm of David: Verse 2: First instance of the psalmist asking for mercy. An ardent petition to those who follow false loves -> God hears and has good things in store for those who are just.  Do justice and God will bless you.
5. Monday Lauds 1&2. Psalm of David: first five verses are a continuous cry to God to listen for God is not a god "volens iniquitatem."  As such, God will not suffer the wicked to prosper.  The psalmist in God's mercy will worship Him.  Then follows a contrast of the wicked with those (us) who hope in the Lord.
6. Monday Compline. The three preceding psalms have the incipit "in finem."  This is the darkest of the three.  Saint Thomas notes that "in finem" might be understood as referring to Christ, the true End of the law, or perhaps that it was composed and sung at the completion of some matter.  In any case, apart from the last three verses, the whole psalm is about the tears and sufferings of David and an extended petition for God to save David from the depths of misery and oppression.
7. Monday compline. This psalm has three sections: first, a petition for salvation from the persecutors, second, the insistence of the psalmist on his own purity/guiltlessness (with a very bold request: "judica me, Domine, secundum _justitiam meam_"), third, the retribution the Lord will exact on the evildoers.
8. Sunday Matins, following 1-3. A psalm of awe, wonder, praise: Awe at God, awe at His Name, awe at creation, awe at God's predilection for poor mortal man.  Begins and ends with an antiphon: "Domine, Dominus noster, quam admirabile est nomen tuum in universa terra!"  Psalms 8-13 will bring back the incipit: "In finem ... Psalmus David"
9. Sunday Matins - the psalter breaks it in four. Begins with a hymn of thanks followed by what seems like a savoring of what God will visit upon the opposing nations(6-13). 14 breaks this theme - begging for mercy upon the psalmist.  15-end is a familiar cycle: blessings of the just, petition for God's help, pride and sufferings of the wicked contrasted by God's tenderness toward the lowly.  A psalm that acts generally as an exhortation to humility as it ends with the verse:  "Desiderium pauperum exaudivit dominus... judicare pupillo et humili, ut non apponat ultra magnificare se homo super terram."
10. Sunday Matins.  A funny verse, "quomodo dicitis animae meae: transmigra in montem sicut passer?"  Augustine treats this as though the enemy were exhorting the psalmist to place his trust in the mountains of the proud or to seek refuge among heretics, while David knows that he already is safe upon the mountain of God.  The Lord is described in the next verses as a just and searching Judge, who examines men and gives to each his portion.  Short and sweet.
11. Tuesday Compline. Save me, Lord, for the saint fails, for truths have been shattered by the sons of men.  A strong opening - The opening seems to imply this is a song in time of calumny.  The main theme will be truth and the deceit of the proud.  The Lord's words are like silver tried by fire - they are totally pure and tested - purgatum septulum - refined seven times.
12. Tuesday Compline.  A short song in time of trial -> usquequo shall my enemies triumph, quamdiu I suffer.  The end is of hope and trust -> I have trusted, I will exult and sing to the name of the most high.
13. Monday Matins.  The world has gone to hell.  The source of part of Anselm's famous meditation on the fool, who says "non est Deus." The poor state of the godless who afflict God's people.  The end notes the final triumph that Israel and Jacob shall have in the end.
14. Monday Matins.  A description of the qualities of the kind of man who shall rest in the Lord and stand firm forever. He does no evil or scandal to his neighbor, swears truthfully without deceit, is no usurer, takes no bribes, and glorifies the Godly.
15. Tuesday Compline.  The psalmist trusts in the Lord.  The Lord is his true sustenance and reward, and David will not turn to the false idols.  The prayer during the purification of the paten includes part of this psalm.
16. Monday Matins. Verse 8 at compline each night. "Custodi nos, Domine, ut pupillam oculi; sub umbra alarum tuarum protege nos."  The psalm has generally three familiar themes in succession: The psalmist's innocence, petition for protection from malice and the enemy, petition for/envisioning of just rewards for the same.
17. Monday Matins, divided in three parts.  David's prayer to the Lord on the day that the Lord delivered him from Saul etc. This is a very long psalm that is totally triumphant (as the circumstances would merit). Reminds me a lot of psalm 117 (Sunday prime).  Like, _A LOT._ If you put in the two verses about bees (circumdederunt me sicut apes...) and chastisement(castigans castigavit me...) I don't think I could distinguish them on first glance. Lots of talk of being delivered and the enemies perishing and being crushed and humiliated, etc.  Thanks be to God.  The incipit: "In finem" returns again through psalm 21
18. Monday Prime, divided into two.  This is where we get the versicle for the common of apostles: "in omnem terram exivit sonus eorum, etc."  God is compared to the sun and to a bridegroom.  There are a number of things which are distinguished: Lex, testimonium, justitiae, timor, judicia.  This is reminiscent of upcoming psalm 118, the big acrostic one about the law.  This is kind of an abbreviated version.  Is there a parallel between psalms 17-18 and 117-118?
19. Monday Matins.  A beautiful blessing upon someone (upon David?).  an instance of a common phrase/theme: "God is to be trusted in more than chariots, etc."
20. Monday Matins.  A prayer of thanksgiving for the victories and joys and riches of the king, followed by a very spicy imprecatory prayer against the enemies for being wicked and plotting against the Lord's goodness.
21. Friday Prime, divided in three.  One of the darkest psalms -> A prophetic psalm of the sufferings of Christ. v. 1-22 are filled with suffering, darkness, and feeling of being abandoned.  v. 23-end speak of being heard by God and the final triumph and glory.  The poor shall have their fill, I shall praise You in the midst of a church, etc.  An excess of dry and empty despair followed by what seems an equally immoderate praise.
22. Thursday Prime. Notably the Vulgate begins "Dominus __regit__ me, et nihil mihi deerit"  This emphasizes the connection between being _ruled_ by God and prospering.  The nova vulgata, that scholarly nightmare, changes this to pascit to fit the shepherd analogy explicitly.  As if Jerome was wrong and hadn't thought to use a more shepherdly word.  For shame, you translators by committee! After this cool opening follows the good shepherd allegory in all its peace and beauty. 
23. Monday Prime.  This song sounds explicitly liturgical - quis ascendet in montem Domini, aut quis stabit in loco sancto ejus?  Innocens manibus et mundo corde, etc.  These qualities are remeniscent of psalm 14.  second half of psalm seems like it could be some sort of antiphonary call and response - a hymn of praise to the King of Glory.  I could imagine praying this before Sunday Mass someday.
24. Tuesday Prime, divided in three. A song of petition after falling into some sin.  First explicit mention of the sin of the psalmist in the psalter.  Remember your mercies; forget the sins of my youth!  This is a psalm that notes the humility of the psalmist in his sin, and begs the Lord for gentleness, mercy, and a way forward.

3-24 Reflection:


25. 

25-41Reflection: