Approaching Psalms and Wisdom literature
---
#scrp501 
08/29/24
---
### Shared sapiential and moral concern
    1. Psalms and wisdom literature show a concern with morality, both in 
    considering specifics of moral action, and the disparity between good and evil.
    2. These books exhibit a shared commitment to:
        - Existence of a moral order
        - natural ability to discern this moral order
        - recognition of the true outcomes of human action
    3. Wisdom as "governing perfection" enabling possessors to order all under them
        - God's wisdom is posited on the basis of his right ordering of the  
        created world and his providential ordering of things to their ends
        - human wisdom consists of both discernment of God's order and aligning  
        one's life and responsibilities with this order.
    4. Shared poetic genre:
        - Unlike other forms of poetry Hebrew poetry is defined not by rhyme or meter but:
            - Parallelism within and between poetic "lines"
            - abundant use of imagery (e.g. metaphor, simile, etc.)
        - A poetic line is not necessarily a sentence or verse,  
        but is a unit compared of smaller parts called "cola"
            - Monocolon (one cola)
            - bicola (two cola! Two!  Ah! Ah! Ah!) (this is the main one)
            - tricola (three cola)
            - quatrain (four cola - looks like two bicola)
                - e.g. psalm one: blessed is the man //  
                who does not guide his steps by ill council //  
                or turn aside where sinners walk //  
                or where scornful souls gather, sit down to rest. 
        - A primary dynamic present within and across line units of hebrew  
        poetry is parallelism which has three types:
            - Synonymous parallelism, expressing similar ideas  
            (e.g. ps. 95:1; ps. 95:4-5)
            - Antithetical parallelism, expressing opposed ideas  
            (e.g. ps. 95:7b-8; prov. 14:1; Prov. 26:4-5
            - Synthetic parallelism, expressing development of ideas  
            (e.g. Ps. 95:11; Ps. 95:10-11)
        - Another primary dynamic is the abundant use of imagery (metaphor,  
        simile, etc.) which itself entails a form of parallelism or likeness  
        between the figure of speech employed and its proper, literal referent.
        - (e.g. Ps. 23, Ps. 95 sheep/pastor image)
    - Location 
