Wisdom literature SCRP501
---
#scrp501
8/22/24
---

### Prolegomena overview:
 - First we will consider revelation - esp. in the OT
 - Next we will consider OT qua text
  - Languages, translations, etc.
  - Contemporary methods
 - Finally we will consider genre
  - savation-historical background to psalms and wisdom lit.

### Documents on Sctipture:
 - 1893 - Leo XII:      Providentissimus Deus
 - 1920 - Benedict XV:  Spiritus Paraclitus
 - 1943 - Pius XII:     Divino Afflatu Spiritu
 - 1965 - Vatican II:   Dei Verbum
 - 2010 - Benedict XVI: Verbum Domini

Leo & Benedict XV: pushing back on a notion of scripture as human historical artifact to the neglect of it being considered as God's Word.

### Dei Verbum:
 - A "peaceful" document: not highlighting controversies
 - Scripture comes from God and is given to the Church and so She is the proper home for its study.
 - Structure:
  1. Revelation per se
  2. Handing on of revelation
  3. Scripture per se
  4. Old Testament
  5. New Testament
  6. Scripture in the life of the Church
 - Today is the only day in this class we will be covering Dei Verbum.
 
 - Caput III:
  - Three "I"s
   1. Inspiration: technical term used to express the mystery of Scripture's dual authorship both divine & human.
   2. Inerrancy: an effect of inspiration: Scripture is entirely without error because it is authored by God
   3. Interpretation: determination of meaning requiring three forms of attentiveness
    a. textual:     To the text qua text
    b. historical:  To the compositional circumstances
    c. pneumatic:   Canonical      - To the larger whole - its content and unity 
                    Ecclesial      - The whole of the living tradition, 
                    Theological    - Holistic unity of the elements of the faith
    - Points a and b are much easier to become competent in.  
    - You could spend a lifetime getting the kind of education you need for historical interpretation.
 
 - Caput VI: De sacra scriptura in vita ecclesiae
  - emphasis in 24 and 25 on how the clergy need to apply themselves to study and reading of scripture so that there are no outward preachers who are not inward hearers.
  - this chapter not focused on study as such, but is "attuned to formational demands"

 - Caput IV: Most pertaining to this course #important
  - OT is not extra backstory, rather it forms a unity.
  - "Nam, etsi Christus in sanguine suo Novum Foedus condidit, libri tamen Veteris Testamenti integri in praeconio evangelico assimpti, in Novo Testamento significationem suam completam acquirunt et ostendunt." DV 16

---
                                         _____
                         _______________/    |
               _________/                   -+-
      ________/                              |
     / Adam, Noah, Abraham, Moses, David, Christ
---
### Figures
#def type/figure: a person, place, thing, or event that bears a historical "impression" of or likeness to the mystery of salvation such that they serve as signs of Christ's person, Christ's saving, and application of saving work to others.
  - David, Jerusalem, etc. important symbols for our study.

### Bergsma Pitre Book:
 - Sees itself as in accord with Dei Verbum
 - Audience:
  - Catholic seminarians
  - grad students
  - ordained ministers
 - Integrated and Ecclesial approach
  - Both Historical and Theological in proper proportion
  - Both Scriptural and Traditional


