First Millenium: Patrology - Dr. Owen M. Phelan
--
 -- Warnings:
 - Dr. Phelan has a dry sense of humor - a touch of cynicism and sarcasm
 - Thinking is hard -> not the same thing as memorization -> need application etc.
  - batting 300 means hitting ball 3/10 -> if 3/10 of your thoughts are worthwhile that's really good
  - your batting average is probably lower than you think
 - Writing is harder
  - reflection on your own thought before speaking / writing can significantly increase your batting average
  - don't run from difficult conversations where you are losing or from having your 

 -- Rumors swirling around:
 - Is doctor phelan a lib?
  - squishy lefty?
   - no straight answer -> he's messing with us

 - anti-papist?
  - he just studies papal history

 - All true?
 - Dr. Phelan - not into modernity
  - modern canon law looks more like journalism
  - more well versed in early medieval etc than modern christian thinking
 - Dr. Phelan - not very "Roman" Catholic?
  - what does roman mean?
  - not ultramontanism
 - Dr. Phelan - too Augustinian?

 -- Syllabus:
 - *Dr. Phelan reads the syllabus course description word for word*
 - we're going to take a chronological survey approach.
 - a couple of thematic moments where we take a glance at specific theological or philosophical topics
 - also a couple days to discuss how people think theologically in different periods of history
 - Grade: midterm 30%, six 2-page group papers 30% (5% each), final exam 40%
 - six books on preistly formation from the greatest priestly formators in the first millenium.
 
 -- Course intro *Dr. Phelan reads the first few items on the calendar verbatim*
  - this thursday: second temple judeaism
  - jewish christianity
  - post apostolic fathers
  - etc.
[vita vs biography - vita is to convey excellence using an example of a person.  biography is something else?]

 -- Group 2 page paper:
 - not a big writing
 - practice in stating things succinctly
  - applicable to preaching and management
 - groups - cultivating a competitive environment and a formative environment
  - requirement to verbalize your insights before writing
  - can help to refine an idea or identify it as a wind-egg
  - proof-reading (activation, punctuation, grammar.)
 - a thesis has to be an answer to a question.
 - is this a valuable, reasonable, acheivable question?  Do I care about this question?
 - is this question pertinent the task at hand?
 - is this question an appropriate size?

 -- Rationales for History
 - Behavior
 - Will of God
 - Group Identity
 - Injustices

 -- Benefits of studying history:
 - Thinking better -> history is an art, not a science
 - Understanding upper and lowercase traditions
 - History is a framework for appreciation of culture -> distinction between "different" and "wrong"

 -- Importance of Church History:
 - We pray with our history
 - Contemplation of providence
 - Vocational impact - how to be like the good dudes and not be like the bad dudes
 - Pastoral impacts - don't be ignorant - there are many easily disprovable wicked lies about the church
 - Act of charity for the dead - pray for those who have passed away
