Jewish Roots and Gospels

---
#lity501
9/5/24

---
NB:

#### Was the Last Supper a Passover?
1. Cabie asks "Did Jesus celebrate the Passover at the last supper?"
2. the synoptics and John all connect the last supper and Passover and passion to the passover
#### Question of the Calendar
1. All four gospelwriters agree that Jesus died on Friday before sundown, but do not clearly agree when the Jewish Passover occured.
	1. Synoptic tradition: Last supper occurred at the Jewish Passover and was a Passover Meal
	2. John indicates that Jesus died at the time the lambs were traditionally slaughtered in preparation for the Passover.  This might suggest that the passover did not begin until after Christ's death
		1. Two (insufficient) ways of dealing with problem:
			1. That Jesus did not celebrate a passover, but a Chaburah. This seems to undercut the evangelists' words.
			2. John was making a theological point, unconcerned about historical detail; although this is also problematic because many scholars hold John's Gospel as the _most_ historical and chronological of the four Gospels.
		2. Hypothesis about two calendars
			1. Temple Calendar: would have been a lunar calendar where Passover would have fallen on Friday evening
			2. Essene calendar: solar calendar with fixed dates where the Passover would have always fallen on Tuesday evening.
			3. Perhaps Jesus celebrated the Passover meal according to the Essene calendar, but John was referring to the temple calendar -> providing a possibility for reconciling the difference.
		3. Calendars cotd.
			1. It _is_ historically clear that there were two different calendars employed at the time of Jesus
			2. The gospels have some connection with the practices of the Essenes
				1.  The life of the Essenes was marked by asceticism, which John seems to have adopted, and their practice of celibacy (Like Mary's vow to celibacy "How can it be since I have no relations with a man?")
				2. Details found in the synoptics: e.g. Lk 22:10 "behold when you have entered the city, a man carrying a jar of water will meet you..."  The Jewish custom was that women carried water jars, except in the Essene community.
			3. The traditional site of the last supper, the Cenacle, is in an Essene quarter of Jerusalem.
			4. This theory helps ease the historical complication of how many things would have occurred from the Last Supper to the Crucifixion. e.g. Jesus was taken before Annas, Caiaphas, the Sanhedrin, Herod, and Pontius Pilate
			5. Ancient sources say the last supper was on a tuesday night c.f. Didiscalia ca. 230
			6. Mainatins the theological richness of Jn's gospel: Jesus was killed at the time the Lambs were traditionally slaughtered
			7. this theory as well as the "Paschal theory" shows that it _was_ a Passover that Jesus ceelebrated.
#### Jewish Passover ritual
1. Seder meal - From the Hebrew for "order"
	1. Main sources: Mishnah and Tosefta
	2. Unfolded according to ritual form: specific things had to happen at specific times.
	3. Organized around four cups: Wine being mandatory even for the poor indicating the essential nature of drinking these cups.
	4. When we look at the Seder meal it should be remembered that this is a reconstruction of the events based on historical sources.
2. Introductory Ceremony - Began in the evening.  The father would gather the family at a large table and recline (which was a sign of freedom from slavery)
	1. Location and furnishing of the Last supper
		1. occurred in the upper room of a Jewish home.
		2. "cenacle" is derived from Latin meaning dining room (cena = dinner)
		3. furniture: short legged "U" shaped table close to the floor.  Servant could walk into center of U to serve those eating.
3. First Cup: the cup of sanctification
	1. Passover meal proper would begin with pouring, mixing, drinking of first cup of wine.
	2. Typical Jewish meal prayer over first cup: "Blessed are you, O Lord our God, King of the Universe, who creates the fruit of the vine."
	3. After the first cup, food would be brought to the table
		1. Bitter herbs
		2. unleavened bread
		3. a bowl of bitter sauce
		4. roasted passover lamb (referred to in Mishnah to "the body")
4. Second Cup: the cup of proclamation
	1. The father would proclaim what God had done for his people in Egypt and then would mix a second cup of wine
	2. The youngest would begin this by asking his father why this night was different from other nights
		1. the father would read scriptures then explain the passages and passover
		2. theological meaning: everyone at passover is participating in the actual exodus itself and its redemption.
	3. In praise of this gift, all would sing the Hallel Psalms: 112 and 113. all responded hallelujah after each half-verse. This concluded the second part
5. Third cup: Cup of blessing
	1. This signaled the beginning of the actual supper
	2. the meal would begin when the paterfamilias took a loaf, broke it, blessed it, and passed it around.
		1. Meal began with hors d'oeurvres
		2. then Paschal lamb was eaten without ritual
6. Fourth cup: cup of consummation/praise
	1. Last of the Hallel psalms would be sung
		1. Ps. 118 - the Great Hallel
		2. this psalm was also a Todah psalm
	2. After the psalm was sung, the fourth cup was drunk
		1. forbidden to drink between third and fourth cups
		2. the drinking of the fourth cup closed the passover sader meal.
#### Jewish Passover and the Gospels
1. Luke mentions two cups:
	1. Second cup (proclamation) - "and he took a chalice, and when he had given thanks..." (22:17)
		1. After this cup he speaks of the meaning of the meal ("this is my body which is given...)
		2. According to an old Aramaic custom the Jewish words while passing this bread were, "See the bread of misery which was eaten by our fathers who passed out of Egypt" (Jesus replaces these words)
	2. Third cup (blessing) - "likewise the chalice after supper" (22:20)
		1. Paul speaks of a "blessing cup" "after supper" (1 Cor 11: 16, 25)
		2. According to the Talmud and the Midrash, the prayer associated with this cup included thanksgiving for the land, liberation from Egypt, and the covenant. (Jesus also replaces these words)
2. Correspondences during last supper:
	1. Synoptics refer to Jesus' vow "I shall not drink of the fruit of the cine until the kingdom of God comes"
	2. Mt. & Mk. Speak of the disciples singing a hymn
	3. all four gospels indicate that Jesus did not finish the meal
3. Correspondences after last supper:
	1. Gethsemane "remove this cup from me, yet not as I will, but as you will" (mt. 14:36)
	2. Fourth cup taken on the cross before His death
		1. He would not drink the wine mixed with gall before His suffering was complete (mt 27:34, mk 15:23)
		2. then he did right before He died (mt. 15:36, Jn 19:23-30)
		3. John draws great attention to this last cup
4. Paschal mystery:
	1. Pitre notes that by waiting to drink the last cup, Jesus unites the Last Supper to His death on the Cross.
		1. The passover meal gives the crucifixion itself the nature of a liturgical sacrifice.
		2. at the last supper, Jesus tied the actions over bread and wine at last supper to history of redemption, and to the new exodus He was to accomplish in Jerusalem
#### Apostolic Eucharist and the Gospels
1. While there are clear correspondences, why are the accounts so limited in detail, and subtly different?
2. The apostolic Eucharist which the apostles would have performed post pentecost was not a passover
	1. the passover did not become the context of fulfilling Jesus' words
	2. this would be against Jewish law, which permitted the passover only once a year.  This would be practically impossible and preclude larger groups.
	3. the accounts contain few details concerning the ceremonial actions of the meal, probably because this was not meant to be the lasting setting of the celebration (Jung, 7)
	4. The Chaburah/Todah were likely the contexts in which the first apostolic eucharists were celebrated
3. Apparent differences in these accounts may have arisen from the differences in the liturgical practice from which they spring (Jungmann, 7-8)
	1. Different apostolic traditions:
		1. paul/luke
			1. seem clear that an agape meal occurred between consecration of bread and wine
		2. matthew/mark
			1. no mention of meal between these actions
	2. Perhaps the liturgy celebrated by matthew and mark already had joined the two consecrations outside the context of a meal.