#### Early Patristic Period
---
#lity501 
2024-09-16, 08:26

---
NB:
 - We will be moving quickly as we approach fall break.  
### Early Patristic Period cont. and growth and consolidation.
1. Hyppolytus of Rome
	1. Rigorist, antipope to Callixtus, reconciled with Pontian, martyred 235
	2. Major work: "Apostolic tradition" - ca 215-225, rediscovered 1910
		1. Notes:
			1. Like the Didache, the genre is "Church orders"
			2. Important collection of laws and ordinances regarding clergy, rites, ceremony
			3. Hyppolytus may not actually be author
			4. Possibly Syrian or Alexandrian rather than Roman, or influential precisely because Roman
		2. Eucharist:
			1. AT is the first real liturgical document, treating fasting, prayer, reservation of the Eucharist, sign of Cross, baptism, ordination, etc.
			2. Offertory
				1. Kiss of peace before offertory
				2. Many items at offertory, oil, cheese, etc.
			3. Concelebration (4.2)
			4. First text of eucharistic prayer - presented as a model to help extemporaneous oratory.
			5.  His text includes most parts of the modern Eucharistic prayer:
				1. Opening dialogue, preface, praise and thanksgiving, anamnesis, institution, oblation, epiclesis, supplication, doxology.
				2. reference also to an agape meal taking place in the evening seperate from the eucharist including a blessing of an evening lamp, the bishop _not_ praying the prayers of the mass.  This is a "eulogy" not a "eucharist."
2. Cyprian of Carthage
	1. North africa, bishop of carthage, worked strenuously for the unity of the church, esp. in lapsi controversy (christians sacrificing to roman gods in order to avoid suffering, and people deciding what to do with them.  Rigorists said, no way back for these dudes.), died 258 under Valerian
	2. Eucharist (Letter 63):
		1. liturgical abuses - some using only water (we cannot use water alone, any more than we can use wine alone.  Clear understanding of water and wine representing humanity(us) and Divinity (Christ))
		2. True Sacrifice: contains the Sacrifice of Christ, from which it becomes efficacious as sacrifice - the whole paschal mystery
		3. Resurrection - Eucharist celebrated in the morning in memory of Resurrection.
		4. Daily reception: refers to daily reception of eucharist, blood of christ, daily reception of blood.
		5. Body of Christ of is the Church is the Eucharist
3. Didascalia Apostolorum
	1. Notes:
		1. 3rd c. supposedly by  bishop in northern syria
		2. Author knew the didache
		3. no particular structure in the text, but a wide range of topics.
		4. genre "church order" - manual or custom-book
	2. Lit. Directives:
		1. Bishop and priests seared in eastern part of church, bishop with throne, praying facing east
		2. deacons stay near the offerings, help people find a place, and help people stay awake.
		3. Welcome a poor man to the point of giving up even your own seat
		4. Not attending the eucharist - "to fail to attend the assembly is to depricce christ of one of his members and to rend the body of the lord"
		5. reference to "deaconesses" - "a woman for the service of women" - for visiting women in pagan households and for (nude) full immersion baptisms
			1. Hippolytus also notes a difference between deacons who receive laying on of hands, and deaconesses, who are something completely different
		6. cemetaries and funeral masses (26.17)
### Growth and Consolidation: Important dates
1. Edict of Milan 313
	1. under constantine
	2. ~20% of people in empire were christian at the time
	3. After edict, christianity became part of public "fabric" and there were exceedingly large numbers of converts
	4. For first time churches were built - bascillicas were seen as the model, not temples.
2. Imperial capitol moved to constantinople 330
	1. This results in a new patriarchate -> not by apostolic establishment, but because of political prominence.
	2. Patriarchates were more administrational in character, established for administrative, political, geographical reasons.
	3. Nicaea (325) set four patriarchates.
3. Roman empire divided east/west 364
4. Christianity becomes state religion 380
	1. Under theodosius
	2. ~50% of population were christian
	3. church and society are now allied, and religious authorities now often have temporal power
	4. court ceremonies were applied to the church and her liturgy
	5. church becomes transmitter of education and culture, beginning of science of theology, increased occurrence of heresies
	6. Church no longer just the committed faithful, but includes thoose of various degrees of commitment
		1. reasons for entering church could be political
		2. decrease in frequency of communion
		3. spurred on the monastic movement as a reaction to "social" christianity
5. Council of Constantinople 381
	1. added patriarchy of constantinople
6. Rome sacked by visigoths 410
7. Council of Chalcedon
	1. Noted constantinople as second in authority to rome
	2. Jerusalem, alexandria, antioch broke away.
8. Fall of Rome 476