Why Celibacy / Porque el celibato  SEMINAR - Msgr. Baker

---
#ordn501
8/21/24

---
NB:
 - Watch opening video
 - Course moved to 0950-1105
 - Seminar - no tests or papers (thank God)
 - No classes 9/4, 10/9, 10/23, 11/27
 - There are resources on Canvas -> to read as helpful

*Msgr. Hands out the Syllabus*

You can make a commitment to celibacy - but how do you live it *well*?

Course part of "ordination formation program" (What is this exactly?)

Today: a homily by Bishop R. Barron on celibacy.

Suggested Reading:
 - Cantalamessa's book
 - Directory for priestly life  (or whatever it's called)
 - PPF VI
 - Priestly celibacy today
 - Friends of the bridegroom
 - Paul VI Sacerdotalis Celibatus
 - Love and Responsability - JPII
 - ToB

Chastity vs Celibacy
 - is there unchaste celibacy?
 - celibacy is a way of living chastity
 - [is this a good distinction?]
 - [celibacy a call to a particular state in life?]
 - [what about chaste marriage?]
 - Celibacy - description / adjective of chastity.
 - disctinction between renunciation (celibacy) and moderation (marriage)
 
Discernment:
 - We someday will be helping others to discern the Lord's call
 - Necessary to be able to discern well oneself

Living celibacy well requires us to live obedience and poverty well.
 - [poverty vs simplicity?]


 -- Robert Barron Homily 32 sunday OT year C.
Celibacy: gift for the Church
 - for all the baptized

Bad argument: celibacy is a more perfect state - and religious need to be in a more perfect state, etc.
 - repugnant to Catholic Metaphysics?
 - Marriage as a creation of God is good.
 - that which exists is good, ergo the body and sexuality are good qua existing
 - [I need to re-read de malo]

Everything created is good, nothing created is god
 - The Church affirms the goodness of the world - art, music, liturgy
 - The Church also affirms asceticism
 - Detachment: (contemptum mundi?)

Celibacy -> 
 - choosing of people by God
 - who live detached from marriage and its goods
 - for the sake of the whole Church
 - as eschatological sign of heavenly life
 - "The children of this age marry and are given in marriage"
 - "but those judged worthy of a place in the age to come"
 - "they become like angels and are no longer liable to death"
 - in a way the making present of the life of heaven in this age.
 - the celibate is a sign to the married of that fulfillment to which marriage points
 - the married is a sign to the celibate of the nuptial love of God.

Celibacy as particularly needed in the contemporary age:
 - as a sign of our true end
 - a living example to the truth of human sexuality
 - Joyful celibacy stands as a living antithesis to many evil contemporary ideologies.


