### Celibacy session 2: electric boogaloo
---
#ordn501 
09/04/24

---

#### Virtue of Chastity
1. Lived by all people
2. we live a celibate chastity
	1. chastity a prerequisite for celibacy

#### Pastoral scenarios
 1. "I'm young and normal. I shouldn't have to live like a celibate until I get married"
	 1. implies a negative view of chastity
	 2. "because something is normal, does it make it moral?"
 2. "Mother in parish approaches you about son viewing pornography - 'Father, what should I do?'"
	 1. maybe the Father could get involved?
	 2. shaping the approach to human sexuality in a positive way (ToB intro, etc.)
	 3. setting appropriate safeguards
	 4. 
3. a young single woman who is very attractive invites you to dinner at a nice exclusive restaurant.  how respond?
	1. does she want to talk about something - is there another venue in which to have this conversation?
	2. "Sorry, I don't eat out with women alone, not about you, but just prudence as a priest"
	3. probably looking for some kind of pastoral care that you could provide in a different context
	4. you have to be careful even with older women(?)
		1. possibility for unhealthy attachment
#### Chastity and Lust
1. #def chastity: a virtue that pays reverence to a mystery (it is a share in God's creative power), beauty (expression of the marital union), and purpose (creativeness) of sex in God's plan.
2. K.W. _Love and Responsiblilty_
	1. Elements of the true meaning of chastity
		1. Objective truth of person: people should be loved and can never be used.
		2. Freedom from utilitarianism in relationships
		3. Living the virtue of temperance: putting our sensual reactions into their proper place: subordinate to reason. a temperate moderation.
		4. Integration: not a repression or devaluation of sexuality, but the integration of them in the context of the whole person, such that impulses can be tied into a correct and reverent attitude towards others.
		6. True love: only the chaste are capable of true love, since chastity follows the personalistic norm (1.)
3. Opposite vice: Lust
	1. #def Lust: the inordinate desire for sexual pleasure
	2. vices like virtues are stable dispositions, not sinful per se, but disordered
	3. many sexual sins fall into categoria of grave matter, because of the good and the beauty of the thing opposed.  St. Thomas -> the worst of mortal sins is the hatred of God, the hating of good itself. 
	4. habitual sins: the absence of moral responsibility cannot be assumed, but it is possible for habitual sin to reduce the ability of one to give full consent to the sin.
	5. Lustful thoughts: often occur in time of weakness -> must be examined carefully in order to avoid.
	6. Masturbation: a sin of lust, disordered expression, care must be taken to avoid esp. in surrounding circumstances.
	7. #def pornography: it is the marked tendency to accentuate the sexual element when reproducing the human body or human love in a work of art, with the object of inducing the reader or viewer to believe that sexual values are the only real values of the person, and that love is nothing more than the experience, individual or shared, of those values alone. (K.W. _Love and Responsibility_)
		1. Art can portray sexuality without distorting it, if presented appropriately(?) within the context of the human person
		2. Pornography can build tolerance, such that users are driven to more extreme things
		3. in order to make a commitment to celibacy for a lifetime, one needs to be free from any kind of addiction to pornography - not an occasional fall, but a habitual attachment -> leading to a lack of freedom to any kind of commitment.
		4. in formation, if habitual, needs to be addressed in both fora because it effects one's whole life.  healing is to be found in both fora.
	8.  Celibacy needs _charism, desire, and capacity_
4. the seven locks of the heart: ways to live chastity well
	1. Feed the heart with good and avoid disordered love entering the heart
		1. fill your life with beauty -> _PRAYER_, good literature, good friends, art, music, etc.
	2. Guarding of the senses (especially the sense of sight)
		1. not that you can't see, but that you shouldn't gaze
		2. other senses too, moderation in drink, moderation in touch, etc.
	3. Keep an appropriate physical distance
		1. dependent upon relationship
		2. according to who they are and who you are
		3. the priest is not a buddy, but a father and a ruler, not to say that he shouldn't be friend-_ly_ 
		4. problem with "friend" relationship with parishioners because of disparity of authority (how does Aristotle NE friendships between non equals apply? does it apply? relationship of generosity/gratitude)
	4. Keep a moral, spiritual, and affective distance
		1. "Emotional chastity" - Fr. Griffin
	5. Protect against inappropriate manifestations of affection
		1. "how would you want a father to react in this situation" (3.3)
	6. Protect the memory and feed it with good
		1. pray for the grace of forgetfulness
	7. Open yourself to the daily duties of life and close self to useless dreams and fantasies
		1. Spend yourself on your daily tasks - it's good to be tired from the day's work
