#### Augustine
---
#morl501 
2024-09-13, 08:27

---
NB:
- From here on, we're doing Aquinas and Pieper.  
### Happiness
1. The catechism adopts his framing of the moral life - happiness is the starting point for moral discussion
	1.  "Let us inquire reasonably how we ought to live. Of course we all want to live a happy life; anyone would agree with this, even before the words are out of my mouth." - Augustine de moribus ecclesiae catholicae
	2. Everyone agrees with it
	3. It keeps moral discussion concrete and practical
2. Categorizing things according to happiness
	1. What gives happiness = only God
		1. quibus fruendum - Things to be enjoyed
	2. What gives less than happiness = everything else
		1. Quibus utendum - things to be used to get to God
		2. What is to be enjoyed and used (used with enjoyment)
			1. means which are intermediate ends (sort of ends)
			2. God does not forbid the love of these things, but only our finding happiness in gift over giver.
			3. If these things are not loved with God as the end in view, then not only will it not be ultimately satisfying (passing things pass away), but you will be missing their original significance/purpose.
---
### Love 
1. "Love and then do what you will"
2. "quia fecisti nos ad te, et inquietum est cor nostrum donec requiescat in te"
3. Different kinds of Love:
	1. Love of self to the point of forgetfulness of God (Adam and Eve in Garden)
	2. Love of God to the point of forgetfulness of self (Christ, the martyrs)
		1. Sex, drugs, rock and roll - all three provide a temporary space to forget oneself, but it is super transitory.
		2. The joy of charity (love of God and neighbor) is tied to forgetfulness of self.
		3. (don't develop yourself to develop yourself - put faces on your formation dimensions) (sheen - the most beautiful woman he'd ever met he sent to a leper colony, and she found a deep joy)
4. Augustine's definition of virtue = ordered love
	1. Order of love: being more solicitous with those with whom circumstances put you in closer contact.
		1. If you have two people with equal need, and you have equal availability, you serve the one that God has put you in closer contact with - God has rolled the dice for you. (de doctrina)
		2. Chesterton - the true test of a philanthropist is to stick him in a chimney with some randoms and see if he gets along with them. no telescopic philanthropy.
### Grace
1. In contrast/opposition to Pelagius, Augustine insists that every good thing about us comes from God without qualification. including:
	1. all our good actions and decisions
	2. even the acceptance of God's grace is a grace
2. You can't say "this thing I did on my own merit" - then you'd be an uncaused cause.  You have received everything you are and do from another.
3. So, practically, the moral life depends on a relentless request for God's help.
	1. God is more generous than we are capable of receiving, more merciful than we are desirous of mercy
	2. This relentless asking makes us continually aware that everything depends on God, and makes us better appreciate the gift once given.  So God delays in given so that we will ask more, lest we believe that we are complete without Him.
	3. If you never tire of asking for mercy, you're set, because God never tires of giving it.

(Sidenote: Theresa of Avila: if you are attached to sin, you will not have the desire for God, once you are free from sin, you become empty, and no longer enjoy creatures ultimately.  Tell people perhaps: soon, I pray that God comes and gives you a taste of Himself, such that you begin to see all things in relation to Him.  Death is coming, when you taste God and forget creatures - what are you doing to prepare for that?)

### Trinity and Morality
1. The end of all morality -> Union with the Sanctissimi Trinitate
2. The Trinity is the operative norm of the moral life
	1. i.e. a situation where there is no division between "my good" and "your good."
	2. Circumincession - the Father's Good is the Son's Good they are the same good, not merely quantitatively, but numerically.
	3. "Love your neighbor as yourself"
		1. your neighbor's good _is_ your good.
		2. where it is your neighbor's good that makes you happy
			1. e.g. people competing to make a baby smile, human sexuality - the desire to excite the other
	4. Distinction of persons without division
		1. That's as happy as you get
3. Doctrine of the Trinity is the Doctrine of Happiness is the Doctrine of Morality
	1. "Behold, 'God is love' (dilectio). Why do we rush to the heights of heaven, the depths of the earth, in search of the One who is near to us, if we would be near to him? Let no one say, 'I don't know what to love.' Let him only love his brother, and he will be loving this same love (dilectionem)" (De Trinitate 8.7.11-8.8.12).
