Teleology in Morality
---
#morl501
8/27/24
---
NB:
question: "undue pursuing of good -> can man pursue a good that is not in accordance with his nature? is it a matter of pursuing one good to the detriment of others?"

### Teleology
 1. Morality, purpose, and a designer
  a. unless something has been given a purpose by someone, there's nothing it's supposed to be or do.
   i. all Dr. M's kids go through a phase and give him unrecognizable crafts. He has to tread lightly and ask "what is it?" to discover its purpose.
   ii. an accidentally painted canvas isn't supposed to be anything.
   iii. Sawdust as a biproduct of making a table isn't supposed to do anything.
  b. The idea of morality & all moral discourse regards what human persons are supposed to be and what human persons are supposed to do.
   i. Unless man has been made for some purpose, the idea of morality is not sustainable (1a)
 2. Can't we give ourselves purpose as a foundation for morality?
  a. culturally? - "doesn't each culture have it's own standards?"
   i. upon investigation, every culture has the same foundational principles of morality.
  b. individually? - "can't we each give ourselves purpose as the basis of personal morality"
   i. goals - you set yourself goals that you try to reach
   ii. language of "authenticity"
   iii. Serial killers: might set goal of killing people, but we don't recognize these goals as moral
   iv. _We don't recognize all goals as moral_
  c. *You can't give yourself purpose, because you didn't make yourself.*

 3. God-based & Human Nature-based
  - When Ockham "killed" teleology in morality, this led to crisis.
  - the way you bind these aspects of morality is with the notion of design
  a. Morality is based on human nature as designed by Almighty God.
   i. Protestant presentation of morality is killing us in public sphere
    - "Morality comes from God" -> good
    - "apart from bible, how do we know what's good and bad?" -> Bad
    - Kant: "what do you do if God tells you to do something bad?"
   ii. it's not about what God has said, but about how man is made.
    - God's law within himself -> Eternal law
    - Our more hazy understanding of this design -> Natural law
    - God's supernatural clarification of this design through revelation -> divine law
    - all of this is fundamentally an insight into how God made us.
  b. a respsonse to Kant (3ai)
   i. teleologically: moral good = fulfilling our purpose
   ii. moral evil = failing to fulfill our purpose
   iii. is it possible to give something the purpose of failing to acheive its purpose? No. Paradoxical.
   iv. God cannot give someone a purpose of failing their designed purpose.
   v. what about responses to the "what about abraham and isaac?"
    - Several responses:
     - God lied to abraham in order that abraham show his loyalty (problematic)
     - Kierkegaard: the act of faith is such that you hold contradictory ideas in your head at once, so Abraham is supreme model of faith because he knows he won't kill isaac and also that God has commanded him to. (also not great - PNC)
     - Aquinas: lawnmower - let's say that thomas asks me if he can borrow my lawnmower, I say, sure but leave your garage open so I can get it later
      - if I delegate someone to get the lawnmower back, not theft.  if they take it without my permission, theft.
      - human life is on loan from God.  God owns life and can authorize the taking of life. 
      - this does not authorize religious killing writ large, only that which God commands.
      - this life is not yours, it's a lawnmower on loan from God. You don't get to get mad when it's your time to go.
  c. What does it mean to say that God is good?
   i. if morality is tied to purpose, but God hasn't been given purpose by somebody else, is he morally good?
   ii. When we say "God is good" we don't mean he fulfilles a purpose as we do, but that His character is expressed when the things he has made acheive their purpose.
   iii. SCG - God is not displeased by us unless we act against our own good.
 4. Can you be morally good without God?
  a. No.
  b. what about "good" atheists?
   i. someone can do morally good things with morally good purposes without believing in God's existence.
   ii. we have tried to show that someone cannot do morally good things for moral reasons without moral insights that depend on God.
   iii. ergo, no-one can be good without God, but one can act morally without being able to make sense of the insights that allow them to tell good from evil.
   iv. can someone survive without their parents? No, but someone can survive without ackgnowledging their dependance on their parents.



