Moral Phil
---
#morl501
8/30/24
---
NB:

### God's establishment of a family structure
1. Individual: Eden
    - Marriage
    - Adoption - Gen 1:26 "Image and likeness" Gen. 5:3 Adam & Seth, Luke 3:38 "son of God"
        - Unless there is a parity on the natural level, talk of adoption is empty.  
        You can't adopt a highway.
        - The only way you get to be children of God is through a miracle.
        - Gen. 2:7 - God breathed his spirit/breath/life
        - participation in divine life, sanctifying grace are not part of human nature.
    - God's Law: Don't eat the wood chips.
        - The law is mysterious to us
        - It is an expression of God's superior knowledge of what is  
        good for us based on how we are designed
        - opportunity to show love and trust
2. Corporate level: chosen people
    - The establishment of people. Exodus 19 (first pentecost 50 days after exodus)  
    Exodus 24 (gesture of sharing the same blood - symbolic of family?)  
    the sharing in Christ's blood is the fulfillment of this sharing in blood-family of God?
    - Ten Commandments Exodus 20

### The serpent's recharacterization of God's law
1. Gen 3 - law and serpent  
    - (serpent first historical-critical exegete?  
    "did God really tell you not to eat of the tree?")
    - the serpent replaces the parent/child paradigm with master/slave paradigm  
    in which the law becomes an instrument of opression.
    - if you accept this new paradigm the only options are:
        - To submit out of servile fear of punishment / mercenary desire  
        for external reward (islam)
        - To rebel in the name of human freedom / flourishing (atheism)

### What happens when the law?
1. Pattern: sin, consequences, repentance, God's mercy
2. Case of Solomon
    - 2 Sam 7: God says he will be a father to Solomon
    - 1 Kings 3: God is extravagantly generous to Solomon and tells him to keep law
    - laws for king: deuteronomy 17:16
        - no great number of horses
        - no go to egypt
        - no harem of wives
        - no accumulating a large amount of gold/silver.
        - why? 1 John 2:16: threefold concupiscence: 
            - of the flesh  - lust
            - of the eyes   - greed
            - pride of life - power (self)
    - in 1 kings 10 & 11, Solomon goes nuts:
        - 666 pounds of gold per year
        - gilded army, gold everything, gold throne, etc.
        - 1400 chariots, 12000 drivers
        - chariots from egypt, etc.
        - he had 700 wives and 300 concubines
    - this is followed by idolatry (like God said)
        - molek -> sacrifice of infants (did solomon kill his own kids  
        on the altars of pagan gods?)
    - ecclesiastes (God allows solomon to experience the natural consequences of his sin)
        - solomon is pretty unhappy.
        - nat. consequence of lavish living
