Theistic foundations of morality
---
#morl501
8/23/24
---
#### NB:
 - I didn't get to sign the attendance sheet - make sure to talk to Dr. M after class

### CCC 1778:
 - quotes Newman: conscience is the voice of God.
 - It is the experience of acting in the presence of some person
  - Problem: some people don't experience this?
   - Our sense of right and wrong is a piece of evidence for God
   - How do we lead people out of this place?

### Proposed alternative systems for moral conviction and why they don't work

 1. Where do our moral convictions come from?
  - can only answer this question adequately with value-neutral language
   - otherwise we are using synonymns for good/right circularly.
   - Finding synonyms for good does not suffice for explanation.


#### Empirical Observation:
 - We can survey and observe in order to come up with metrics for right/wrong
 - Empirical observation only shows you what _does_ happen, not what _should_ happen
  - e.g. Empirical obs. shows you that ethnic cleansing occurs, but moral sense tells us that it should not occur.
  - so knowledge of the what cannot be reduced to knowledge of the ought.
 - once you know the difference between right and wrong, empirical observation can help you to pursue good and avoid evil more effectively but it cannot give you moral values.

#### Emotivism:
 - Pleasure / Personal preference / impulse
 - the idea that our moral convictions are convictions of what we want/feel/like
 - Aquinas: our desires are responses to _perceived_ goods.
 - We insist that the truth of our moral convictions is independant of our personal situation. 
 - Some desires change over time.
 - We don't tend to universalize our personal likes/dislikes, but we do want to universalize our moral convictions
  - exempla gratia I want everyone to have the same view I have on abortion; I don't want everyone to have the same view I have on hard double salt licorice.
 - We recognize that we don't experience our moral convictions and personal preferences with the same strength.
  - (part of virtue is the passions being brought into line with morality such that we experience our moral convictions)
  - exempla gratia: in _calvary_ the priest who gets shot because he says he cried over his dog but not the abuse scandal
 - We tend not to argue about personal preference, but you do argue about moral convictions
  - exempla gratis: You don't argue with a guy who says he likes black licorice, but you do argue with a guy that says abortion is fine.

#### Survivability: 
 - What if morality just means biological fitness?
 A. Do you mean at the individual level?
  - answer seems to be no.
   - e.g. "why'd you kill that guy?"  "because I needed his kidney."  "oh good for you!"
 B. Species level:
  - would justify things like killing the weak to keep the species strong?
  - most of us aren't aware of what is good for the species.
  - most of us also don't consider the advantage of the species when condsidering morals.
 C. Subconscious:
  - It's not that you think you're doing this for survival, you have been programmed to do this biologically
   - you can't appeal to the subconscious against the conscious
    - "Brian, you didn't actually raise your hand because you had a question; you raised it because you instinctively know that exercise in the right arm is conducive to fitness and the preservation of the human race."
    - there's no end or accountability to these kinds of explanations
    - "You're not arguing with me because you think that I'm wrong; you're arguing with me because you subconsciously know that strengthening my position will be better for the success of the species."
    - "You're not arguing with me because you think I'm wrong; You're arguing with me because you're subconsciously gay and can't resist my good looks."


#### Cultural Relativism / Cultural Consensus
 - The culture or the cultural authority figures determine what is wrong and right
 A. Authority Figures:
  - This is saying that primitive authority figures invented the concept of morality to get them to do what they want.
   - but how did the authority figures invent the idea of values if it was something of which they had no previous experience? (no experience of any value at all - they invented values)
   - How could they motivate people with the idea of values to which the people had no sensitivity?
 B. Cultural Consensus:
  - if the cultural consensus is the standard for right and wrong, then by definition social reform is impossible.
   - Segregation and slavery were good y'all - as long as the majority thought so.
  - Our civilization idolized cultural reformers who act contra the majority.
  - If the majority is right, the minority is wrong just for being the minority.
  - one of the main functions of moral language is to protect the weak and few from the strong and many.
  - Doesn't explain any harmony/reason in morality.
