#### Moral Theo cotd.
---
#morl501
2024-09-06, 08:27

---
NB:
 -  
### The failure of the world
1. Sacred history and secular history
	1. sacred history - Jews
		1. contribute monotheism, the moral law given by God
		2. but under the pharisees / maccabees, the best Jews fail to be faithful to God.
	2. Secular History:
		1. Greeks: individual excellence -> ending in perversion & corruption
		2. Romans: corporate excellence -> ending in perversion & corruption
		3. Saint Paul classifies these excellences as a kind of wisdom
	3. Aquinas: "why did God wait so long?" "because He needed man to see that he couldn't do it himself."
2. Christ shows that He doesn't need the prestige / excellences of the world to fulfill His work.
	1. He chooses people of similar social standing as His apostles, not of the priestly class, without Greek learning, without Roman power.  
	2. But if you do have a gift, you are to make use of it - Saint Paul.
3. Saint Paul - the man of three civilizations
	1. Jewish religious training
	2. Schooled in Greek learning and literature
	3. Roman citizenship
	4. He's able to tell the pagans and Jews -> without Christ, all these skills and benefits will effect no good.
4. Neither natural or religious excellence works without christ:
	1. The pagans are given up to their lusts and act shamefully
	2. The religious teachers live as hypocrites and lead people away from God
	3. Paul says: Christ is all, human strengths fail.
### Justification in St. Paul
1. Justification = process of being made righteous
	1. Righteous: being in right relationship with God
	2. How is one justified? By faith in Christ.
2. Faith, Works, Law - senses of each
	1. Faith:
		1. James: one definition of faith means intellectual acceptance of certain propositions about God and Jesus, and this is not sufficient - even demons believe and tremble.
		2. Paul: Faith means full personal commitment to Christ: Rom 10: you must believe in your heart (heart meaning the whole of the person / the whole interior man) - this _is_ sufficient for salvation.
		3. Luther took definition of James, and linked it to the outcome of Paul's definition of faith.
		4. In gospels and hebrews: Faith has the confidence that results in wonders
	2. Works:
		1. Paul: Works of the Law
			1. The Mosaic Law - dietary, ritual, civil norms
			2. He contrasts this with faith
			3. This contributes nothing to salvation, and can be harmful to salvation
			4. adherence to the mosaic ritual -> you had perhaps a little bit of time to keep the mosaic ritual, but once the messiah has come, you are in practice rejecting Christ. "we're still waiting"
		2. Paul: "Work" that originates in God that we do and _does_ contribute to salvation.
			1. Passages:
				1. Rom 2:6 "to each man according to his works", 
				2. Phil 2:13 "God is at work in you etc.", 
				3. 1 Cor "co-workers with God in vineyard"
	3. Law:
		1. Mosaic code - __obsolete__ - see above
		2. Romans 2: Law written on the human heart
			1. Comprises the natural law and its expression in the ten commandments
			2. this law is still binding, Rom 3 & 7
			3. it does not provide the grace to be able to follow it, so it functions more to highlight where we fail morally without helping us to improve. (Rom 7)
		3. The "law" of sin (Rom 7)
			1. This is saint Paul talking about concupiscence, or the proclivity to sin
			2. This is what makes it so that we can't do what we know is right, which causes distress.
		4. Law of the spirit of life in Christ
			1. This is the new law of Christian perfection that gives us the grace to follow it.