Widsom and Psalms - Dr. Hahn
---
8/20/24
---

### Syllabus
 - *Dr. Hahn reads the syllabus word for word* (mostly)
 - here the lion's share of reading is the biblical text itself
 
### Course Requirements
 - participation (10%)
 - Reading log (25%) 9/17, 10/1, 11/7, 12/5
  - Required to share rolling document -> onedrive preferred.
 - Mid-term (20%) 10/3
  - Thursday before fall break - focus on psalms.
 - Paper (20%)
  - 5-6 pages on choice of assigned topics - psalm 2 or psalm 16 with an eye to their use in Acts.
  - Use two posted sources; find three more other sources.
- Final comprehensive (25%)
  - Time and Date TBD
 
### The veiled presence of Christ
 - Road to Emmaeus -> Christ disguised opens the minds of the two disciples to the indication of the passion and ressurrection in OT.
  - We also discover the veiled Christ in OT scripture

### Policies texts etc.
 - class policies same as sytematic
 - texts:
  - bring a bible to every class
   - preferred translation RSVCE
  - Bergsma-Pitre book
  - m. gorman elements of biblical exegesis
  - catholic bible dictionary - dr. s. hahn

### Schedule:
 - Readings on Method
 - Psalms
 - Proverbs
 - Ecclesiastes

### Why start wi/ wisdom?
 - a while back they combined wisdom lit and intro to scriptures so as to have more courses on NT
 - interpretive benefits:
  - Jerome suggests teaching scripture with the psalms
  - within the OT cannon these books more than any others assume a prior familiarity with prior books.
  - it provides us with an interpretive lens and looks forward to the fulfillment of divine promises and prophesy
 - Theological benefits:
  - Wisdom literature is didactic in its very form.  There is teaching that considers eschatology and other things.
 - Formational benefit
  - Fits in nicely with our daily prayer - we're already praying the psalms.
  - Scripture demands to be put into practice not merely read.
