#### History of Celibacy
---
#lity501 
2024-09-11, 08:27

---
NB:
 -  
### Pastoral Scenarios
1. "why can't we go back to early church"
	1. Can't undo history - you can't "go back" to early church practices -> you'll be starting new ones because they haven't been handed down to you.
	2. Ancient levitical cultic practice of continence during ministry, and the priest is constantly in ministry.
	3. The essenes maintained that they were true to the priesthood qua celibate, during 2nd temple period
2. "why are priests forced to be celibate"
	1. Not forced
	2. unhealthy negative view of celibacy as punishment, not as gift/sign
3. "Celibacy is unnatural, and leads to sex abuse.  why continue?"
	1. By statistic, most abuse happens in the home by family members - should people not marry?
	2. The abuse is precisely where people aren't being faithful to their promises.
	3. not unnatural, but supernatural -> 
4. "celibacy is too lonely a life for normal men"
	1. not a lonely life, although you are alone
	2. marriage does not preclude lonliness

### History
1. Apostolic origins of celibacy
	1. Multi dicunt: celibacy began in 4th c. when certain practices were adapted in law, eastern practice is earlier, etc.
	2. Recent research has noted the history of celibacy as an ancient practice and one with Apostolic origins in the Catholic Church.
	3. From apostolic times, celibacy noted as the "most suitable" way to live priestly life.(argument from fittingness)
	4. "ius" vs "lex" - Ius was a more generic term for law including oral commands, customs, possibly written rules.  There were customs and regulations that were part of the oral tradition, not codified until later on.
	5. the practice of the early church -> if married, they would live with their wife as though with a woman-helper or as a sister-woman - the lex continentiae - with agreement of their spouses prior to ordination.
	6. ERGO it's incorrect to say that celibacy begins with the written law.  The earliest law is from Spain -> noting that priests were to be totally continent with their wives -> an articulation of an oral tradition.
	7. Trent -> reaffirmed universal law of 11th c.
	8. Vatican II -> discussion of changing lex continentiae, ended up reaffirming it.
2. Eastern church
	1. historically there was a modification of the lex continentiae.
	2. east and west had to address the laxity among clergy in following the lex.
	3. in the east they responded by relaxing the law (ca. end of 7th c. eastern council of truyo(?)).  The east __did not__ preserve a more ancient discipline.
	5. in the west they responed with a stronger push to maintain this law.