Fr. Heaslip - Intro to Lity
--

 -- Syllabus day:
 - Read the Syllabus
 - The largest part of the grade is the reading
 - 100-150 word posts on the reading.
 	- group discussion based on posts on reading.
 - Final and Midterms are comprehensive
 - reading and posts 40% + midterm and final 30% each.

 -- Book review - the texts we will be using:
 - Jesus and the Jewish roots of the Eucharist Brandt Pitre
  - Pitre has profound insight regarding Jewish tradition
  - If you look at the tradition of the Jews before and after Christ we see that it sheds new light on our faith
  - Good spiritual reading or academic supplementary reading
 - Robert Cabie - History of the Mass
  - History of the mass
  - The author will be addressing some mistranslations that have since been remedied in ICEL's translation of the 3rd Ed. RM
  - He is unduly critical of certain parts of Church History 
    - for example in the medieval period he tends to slight some of the things that they removed
 - Wellspring of Worship - Jean Corbon
  - Trinitarian dimension of the liturgy
  - We will look at it especially with spirit of the lity / ars celebrandi

 - Mostly the reading will be pretty managable - there will be some more extensive readings.
  - the more you read the deeper you will learn.
  - towards the end of the course when we read the GIRM -> bigger readings.

 -- The Mass is a central part - the very heart - of what it means to be a priest.
 - The work of Christ's redemptive mission - incarnation passion resurrection is continued in the Mass

--

 -- Why do we study the Liturgy?
 - Sacrosanctum Concilium: The church herself calls us to study the liturgy (16)
 - Inter Oecumenici 11-17
 - This takes place in our theological studies - the liturgy itself has a profound doctrinal value:
  - Loci Theologici - Place of tradition and repository of the deposit of faith
   - one of the theological sources from which we draw theological truths 
    - mass, bible, fathers, oral tradition, etc.
  - The liturgy is a prime example of tradition not contained formally in scripture
  - Lex orandi, lex credendi, lex vivendi - the way we pray expresses and shapes what we believe "liturgy is a form of catechesis"(?)
   - Pius XI 1936: "Liturgy is the most important organ of the church in the ordinary exercise of its teaching office."
   - as the church prays so she believes - as we look at the way the church prays we can come to find and know and learn the faith
   - the liturgy expresses the apostolic faith itself.
    - E.G. Council of Nicea / Constantinople defence of the divinity of the Holy Ghost on the basis of the prayer of the church (esp. doxologies)
 - The Liturgy interprets the scriptures and 'brings home' its meaning
  - New lectionary already implies an interpretation of old/new testament through mere scripture selection
  - The various texts and chants: Sanctus Sanctus Sanctus
  - liturgical cycle - sanctification of time
 - Priestly promises: "To celebrate faithfully and reverently in accord with the church's tradition"
  - if you want to say yes to this you need to know what is in accord with the Church's tradition
  - We will see what is good in every period of liturgical history so we can understand the tradition.
 - Study of Lity enables us to grow spiritually
  - To be able to see better the depth and beauty of the mass - in the whole and each part
  - To gain fervor for prayer so as to lead others through pious zeal

 -- The term Liturgy:
 - Liturgy in greek -> liturgia -> public work
  - Something that occurs within a body of people that has a character of work
  - the church adopted this term because it is the church's public work of worship of God
  - also the participation of the people of God in the 'work of God'
  - this work of worship is only to be understood in light of Christ
  - Greco-Roman definition of liturgy:
   - A public office which a citizen undertakes to administer at his own expense, and which involves civic and religious duties.
    - Liturgia is a "public" action of the church, not private or personal
    - "Citizen" - Individuals participate as members of a corporate body.
    - "at own expense" there is an element of sacrifice from each member
    - " duty/action - not texts or rubrics, but an act of worship.  The symphony is not the score.  The Mass is not the missal.
 - "Liturgy" in Scripture:
  - Exodus 28:35 service of priest in temple
  - Luke 1:23 Zechariah's service in temple
  - Hebrews 8:6 Christ's lity is superior
  - Romans 15:16 Paul is "liturgist" of christ to the gentiles
  - Romans 15:26 collection for poor
  - Acts 13:2 worship
 - Used in anc. greek eccle. writings
  - service to god
  - service to community
  - by 300s only used to refer to mass
  - term disappeared for a while until the 1800s.
 - Latin terms for liturgy:
  - Munus -> service, duty, tax, gift
  - Officium - service, ceremonial duty, official duty
  - Servitus - service, slavery
  - Ministerium - Service, official duty
  - Sacramentum - ritual oath of allegiance
  - Mysterium - secret, mystery, secret religion
 - The greco-roman, scriptural, and ancie. east and western eccles. connotations are basically in harmony.

 -- Questions:
 - 
