Overview of the Mass
---
#lity501
8/26/24
---
#### NB:
 - 

#### reading questions:
 - implication in Luke of the Lord's supper ongoing because of pres. act. verbs?
  - In Holy Mass, Jesus' actions are continued
 - How to explain that last supper is the Mass seperate from Jewish passover to prots?
  - All the accounts, the four essential actions from last supper are continued in every single western and eastern liturgy.
 - Connection between fourfold structure of Christ's words at last supper and Mass itself.
  - Our participation in this structure? preparing altar as people at mass offering their prayers with sacrifice?
   - I can't understand what JA is saying he's kinda rambling - Look at his post after class

### Essential structure of the mass
 - this will perhaps be helpful in teaching OCIA etc.
  - people are interested in the Mass
  - grasping ancient nature of lity increases appreciation

 A. Introductory rites:
  - These rites only have value in light of lity of word and Eucharist.
  1. Entrance Procession: from roman triumph - symbolizes the journey of Church towards heaven
  2. Sign of the Cross: a Trinitarian invocation and greeting.  The greeting is an ancient Christian greeting (from scripture)
  3. Sprinkling rite (asperges me etc.) - 9th c. AD; prepatory recalling of baptism
  4. Penitential rite - 2nd C. AD; Didache 15.1, roots in 1Cor11:28 (let each one examine himself before he eats)
  5. Kyrie; remnant of ancient entrance litany Eastern 4th C.
   - Greek - continued in Latin lity which added the "Christe"
   - Latin 9th c. development of ninefold Kyrie - trinitarian
  6. Gloria:
   - Among earliest of all Christian Hymns
   - Originally part of the office on Christmas
   - 6th C. Extended to pontifical masses on solemnities
   - 10th C. present practice (sundays and solemnities)
  7. Collect
   - Presidential prayer - major Oration
   - prayer of priest on behalf of people
   - Collect - the prayers were collected together in one, as part of a collection of prayers(?)
   - major orations always conclude a procession
   - The three collects: intro procession, offertory procession, communion procession
 B. Liturgy of the Word:
  - Present even from the early Apostolic age
  - Given to us so that we be open to Christ - preparing us for lity of Eucharist
1. Readings
  2. Responsorial psalm - 3rd c.
  3. Alleluia:
   - Praise the lord - From hebrew
   - Originally sung at Rome during easter sunday, then later its use was broadened
   - Sequentiae - now only on Easter and Pentecost (corpus Christi and OL sorrows)
  4. Evangelium:
   - High point of lity of Word
   - Words of Christ
   - Sign of cross and standing for Gospel go back to very early days of church
   - Kissing the book of Gospels; 
    - until 13 c. book was kissed by clergy and faithful in sanct. 
    - now just the bishop/priest/deacon who proclaimed it.
  5. Homily - (highly reccommended) required to give a homily on sundays and HDOs
  6. Credo
   - Originally used in baptismal rite
   - After times of heresy it was used at Mass
   - in east earlier, introduced 6th c. western church in toledo
   - adopted in rome 1014 by charlemagne
  7. General Intercessions
   - Attested by Justin Martyr 150
   - Eventually fell out of use but not entirely (preces in office for example)
   - (or "prone" in middle ages - various prayers and news at pulpit)
 C. Liturgy of the Eucharist: fourfold action
  1. He took Bread
   - Procession - attested by Justin 2 ad
   - Offering of bread - jewish sator meal prayers
   - mingling of chalice with water 
    - both anc. roman and jewish custom
    - would have occurred at last supper.
    - symbolic of two natures
   - offering of chalice - same as bread
   - inaudible prayers (Dan 3:39-40) personal prayers for priest. apologiae
   - Incense
   - Lavabo
    - 4th c. (at least)
    - practical to cleanse hands from incense
    - symbolic of purification - lavabo manus meas inter innocentes et circumdabo etc.
    - Orate fratres and prayer over gifts
  2. He Blessed it - Anaphora
   - to bear + upward
   - opening dialogue: unchanged since 3rd. C ad
   - preface: changable intro, part of Anaphora
   - Sanctus: Isaiah 6:1-3
    - Included in mass by Sixtus I
   - Canon (fixed rule - originally spontanious prayers of bishop(?))
    - Roman canon: Rome at end of 4th c; present form by Gregory the great
    - EP 2: modeled on anaphora of Hippolytus
    - EP 3: Modeled on Alexandrian, Byzantine, Maronite anaphorae
    - EP 4: Modeled after anaphora of St. Basil
   - Elements of every EP:
    - Praise and thanksgiving(preface)
    - Epiclesis
    - Institution narrative and Consecration
    - Acclamations
    - Anamnesis
    - Oblation
    - Intercession
    - Doxology
    - Great amen
  3. He broke it - Rite of Peace and the Fraction of the host
   a. Pater Noster - has been in various places in the mass
    - Gregory the great placed it before communion and associated it with EP
   b. Embolism: expansion of the final petition: Saint Gregory and the Gallican rites (10th. c.)
   c. Prayer for peace and signum pacis:
    - First before prep of gifts (Mt 5:23f)
    - 5th C. moved before communion
   d. breaking of bread(fraction); most ancient term for celebration of Eucharist (Acts2:42)
   e. Agnus Dei: introduced ca. 700 AD Sergius I (had been part of syrian rite)
   f. Commixture - two sources
    - Sancta: 
     - particle of host from previous mass dropped into chalice
     - signified:
      - unity of all masses as one and the same unique sacrifice of calvary
      - permanence of eucharistic presence.
    - Fermentum:
     - Pope or bishop sent fragments of Host he consecrated to priests of his parishes; sign of unity and communion with Bishop
   g. Private preparation of priest (Gallican 10th c.)
  4. He gave it
   a. Invitation to communion and response (Jn 1:29, Mt. 8:8)
   b. Communion of priest
   c. Communion antiphon
   d. Communion of people
   e. silence
   f. postcommunion prayer
 D: Concluding rite
  1. Announcements (?)
  2. Greeting
  3. Blessing
  4. Dismissal (ite missa est source of word mass)
  5. Closing song (?)

