Liturgy in the Old Testament
---
#lity501
8/29/24
---
NB:

 - *Reading of Posts*

### Liturgy in Old Testament

#### Importance of Jew Liturgy
 1. The practices & significance of the liturgy of the new covenant flowed directly from the Jewish Liturgy's feasts and customs.
 2. Instrinsic Connections
  a. Like the NT, the OT is the revealed word of God
  b. Passover - the Last Supper was the first Eucharist
   - Jesus chose a liturgical/ritual context to institute the sacrament
  c. Temple worship is the basis of new covenant liturgical theology
   - e.g. the Jew feast of yom kippur is realized in the liturgy of heaven
   - the sacrifice of the lamb realized in the passion
  d. Jewish religious meals are the basis of the first christian celebrations of the Eucharist
 3. Jesus who instituted the new covenant was a Jew, and faithful to every letter of the Mosaic Law, including its liturgy.
  a. the apostles and first converts were all jews
  b. in the 1st Cent, there was a regular christian presence at temple and synogogues
  c. Initially christianity was seen as a branch of Judaism
 4. A clear break eventually occurred that distinguished jews and christians
  a. christians were expelled from temple and synagogue
  b. destruction of temple in 70 AD
  c. polemics against the jews in ancient christian writings
 5. to downplay the jews us ti ugbire God's revelation in the history of salvation

#### Temple Worship
 1. The temple and tabernacle were modeled after Moses' vision of heaven.  The tabernacle was a sign of God's presence
  a. the levites were responsible for divine worship and the furnishings of the tabernacle
 2. Outer Court of tabernacle
  a. first part of tabernacle, white lining of tent curtain around whole enclosure
  b. altar of sacrifice inside this curtain-fence
  c. bronze laver for ritual washing
 3. Tabernacle
  a. the first vestibule is called the "holy place" containing:
   - golden menorah
   - table for bread of presence
   - altar of incense
   - Veil segmenting the Holy of Holies
  b. the inner vestibule called the "holy of holies":
   - Held the ark of covenant containing tablets of stone, manna, Aaron's rod.
   - on ark, there is mercy seat with statues of seraphim.
 4. Solomon's temple and Herod's temple were structured similarly
  a. there is sometimes a change in God's commands for men in time
   - development of having a temple from traveling with the tabernacle
 5. Daily Sacrifices:
  a. THe temple was the central place and only legitimate place for sacrifice, which occurred every day
  b. Meaning of morning and evening daily sacrifices:
   i. Offering of a gift to please God and seek God's help: this meaning especially present in burnt offering/holocausts.
   ii. Entering into communion with God by sharing in the sacrifice qua meal: creates a bond.
   iii. Shedding of blood: blood is the power of life in every creature; God commanded the offering of animals in substitution.
    - Substitution of the paschal lamb for the firstborn in exodus.
    - firstborn: emphasis is on the one who has the second highest role in the family.
   iv. to atone for an offence by giving up something precious: animals not cheap.
 6. Kinds of Sacrifce:
  a. Korban = Sacrifice/Offering/"to draw near" referring especially to burnt offerings
  b. Burnt offering (Holocaust: entirely burnt) - to commune with God, expiate sins, submit to His will
  c. Peace offerings (burnt or consumed)
   i. Express thanks or gratitude to God for his bounties and mercies.
   ii. Includes thanksgiving offerings (Hebrew: todah, reqd. for survivors of crises)
  d. Sin offerings for unintentional sins
  e. guilt offerings - when there was doubt if sin had been committed
  f. Food offerings to God for the fruits of the earth.

#### Bread of the Presence
 1. One of the sacrifices in the temple:
  a. Flagons for wine, bread of fine flour, and incense were placed on an acacia gold-covered table
  b. sometimes called "bread and wine of presence"
  c. the wine was not poured out, but drunk in a sacred meal of bread and wine by levites
  d. it was renewed every sabbath as a holy sacrifice of the everlasting covenant.
 2. Translations:
  a. Showbread, bread of display, bread of offering, bread of the presence
   i. each of these connote the bread being placed before God's presence in the Holy of Holies
   ii. the word for presence "panim" literally translates as "face"
  b. Literal translation: Bread of the face
   i. of the face of God
   ii. Pitre interprets this as a memorial of Ex 24 11-29, where the elders go up to mount Sinai and see God and eat and drink.
 3. Jewish traditions developed around bread of presence
  a. Melchizedek - his offering of bread and wine is connected to the bread and wine of the presence
   i. implies that the offering is more ancient than the offerings in exodus.
  b. Holy sacrifice - the bread of the presence is a most holy sacrifice
   i. The loaves were baked with small pieces of dough on the sides like the horns on the altar of sacrifice
   ii. before the bread was brought into the holy place it could be laid on marble, but afterwards could only be placed on gold
    - Ezekiel refers to the golden table as an "altar"
   iii. when bread was there the menorah had to be lit.
   iv. the talmud suggests that even a very small portion of the bread could provide miraculous sustinence
 4. Displaying of the bread of the presence as a sign of God's live and covenant
  a. only the priests could see the sanctuary, so in each of three pilgrim feasts the bread was displayed outside the sanctuary for the sake of the pilgrims.
  b. a priest would lift up the bread of the presence so the people could see it, saying "behold, God's love for you"
 5. There is a profound theological and liturgical continuity in Jew understanding of bread and wine of presence and Jesus' institution at last supper.

#### Daily prayers and Jewish feasts of the temple
 1. Religion of time
  a. The semitic purpose behind certain hours of prayer and their series of festivals was the sanctification of time: to dedicate all times to God.
 2. The three Cycles (origins of the Christian lit. year
  a. Daily cycle of prayers at set times, Morning, afternoon, evening
  b. weekly - Sabbath
  c. yearly - pilgrim feasts
   i. Passover: deliverance from egypt, spring harvest
   ii. Pentecost: law of mosesm summer grain harvest
   iii. tabernacles: desert wanderings, fall harvest
   iv. yom kippur, feast of dedication(honnukah), etc.
 3. The passover:
  a. greatest celebration
  b. festival of deliverance from death and slavery by God
  c. commemorated in the saccrifice of lambs in the temple: at one point, countless numbers.
  d. lamb meat was taken home for sator meal
  e. important aspects: 
   i. Unblemished male lamb
   ii. sacrifice of lamb
   iii. Spreading of blood over doorpost (this died out over time)
   iv. eating the flesh of the lamb with unleavened bread
   v. four cups of wine
   vi. passover kept as day of remembrance of the exodus
    - seen as a participation in the first exodus
    - "in each generation a man must so regard humself as if he came forth himself out of egypt" - mishnah

#### Synagogue
 1. greek: okace of assembly
  a. a place of prayer, instruction, study, community focused on the Word
  b, essentially a lay institution, with Rabbi, but any bar mitzvah'd male could read and comment
  c. oriented towards temple, became central post destruction
  d. sabbath services, but also study and prayers during the week.
 2. Examples of prayers in the Synagogue
  a. Word - readings and sung psalm responses
  b. the sabbath hymn of praise
  c. prayer of 18 petitions
   i. was prayed standing
   ii. began with "Lord, open my lips etc."
   iv. included three blessings, twelve intercessions, then three blessings
   v. certain prayer services in morning, afternoon, evening required attendance by ten men


#### Homes
 1. Religious life in home centered on prayer - home seen as place of worship
 2. Daily prayers: shema, etc. blessing was a major part of this
  a. birket ha-mazon has elements of the eucharistic prayerL thanksgiving for creation and for the history of salvation, memorial, intercessory prayer
 3. Sabbath - began and ended with worship in the home and included a sabbath home blessing
 4. Passover occurred in Home - the center of this is the sator meal
 5. Meals - e.g. sabbath meal, _chaburah_ which was a festive religious communal meal for friends seeking to live the law of God.


