Transmission of Revelation
---
#syst501
8/27/24
---
NB:

### Recall prev. operative principles:
 1. Fitting neccessity of the sensible and enunciable
 2. Trinitarian Christocentricity
  a. See John 1
   i. one thing that doesn't seem to belong in John 1: the interlude where he introduces the Baptist.
   ii. John came to bear witness to the light that all might believe through him
    - does the light need witnesses?
     - no. 
    - so that _all_ might believe through him?
     - not necessarily
    - John here "stands in" for all that human witness serves in praedicatione of the Gospel
     - God reaches men through other men. not in competition with 2.
### Instrumental mediation
 1. #def Instrumental mediation: Man is tasked with bearing testimony to the Light. God works through men to reach other men. This does not denegrade man, but elevates him.
  - God is primary actor, man is mediator.  This does not imply distance.
### One sacred deposit (CCC 84)

 #### Sacred scripture
  1. Dual Authorship
   a. God primary author
  2. Distinction of senses:
   a. Literal: the things the words signify
   b. Allegorical: reference to christ/the church
   c. moral: how this bears on human action
   d. anagogical: eternal significance
  3. biblical canon
   a. the list of books that belong to scripture
   b. the contents of the books.
   c. all scripture bears testimony to Christ.  
   d. no "inspired table of contents"
 #### Sacred tradition
  1. What is it?
   a. it includes doctrine, life/action/morals, liturgical worship.
    i. these are the things that the Apostles received from Christ: preaching, teaching, institution of Mass and Sacraments.
    ii. belief, practice and life, prayer
    iii. much of culture is unwritten.
  2. Relation to "traditions"
   a. Distinction between "uppercase" and "lowercase" traditions.
   b. there are practices curated by magisterium that aren't required to be held.
   c. the particular way in which the Tradition is lived out is not as universalized and regulated.
  3. responsibility of "handing on"

