Introduction to the CCC
---
#syst501
8/23/24
---
NB:
 - handout: Table of contents for the CCC
 - Questions:
  - since Trentine Catechism was promulgated by an ecumenical council, does it still serve as a resource free from error for the sake of teaching the faith?
  - Does the Trentine Catechism treat theology more than the CCC?
 - Today, CCC Part 1, Section 1, Chapter 1 - 2.1

### Coming to knowledge of God
 - Starting point of the CCC.
 - The opening paragraph of the Catechism summarizes the Gospel -> and everything covered in paragraphs 26-73
 - The catechism first wants to establish a natural orientation of man to knowing God - creation is witness to God.
 - "natural theology" - what we might call today _metaphysics_.
 - Man is a knower and lover who lives in an world in which creatures are intellegable and so is their order.
  - these give testimony to their creator and ruler who gives them being and rule.

#### First Operative principle:
 - #def First Operative principle: The fitting necessity of the sensible and effable
 - Language is limited when speaking about God and Divine things.
  - we have knowledge of sensible created things.
  - the CCC states that whenever we attribute some perfection to God, He is so transcendant that he is more unlike that which we attribute than like.
   - true but incomplete knowledge of God.  We never exhaust the knowledge of God.
  - St. Thomas tria via:
   - Via causativa: God as first cause
    - establishes _that_ God is
   - Via negativa / via remotionis: What God is not
    - as first cause He is fundamentally unlike creatures
    - we can remove from Him every limitation found in creatures
   - Via supereminentiae: God as supereminent
    - not only the source of created perfections, but infinitely exceeds them.
    - Deus semper maior
### God's plan exceeds man's knowledge or desire: 
 - In creating God bestows:
  - Goodness
  - Existence
  - Order
  - Intelligebility
  - Life
  - Rationality (capacity for God)
 - God wants still more for man: He wishes to elevate man's capacities even above of man's nature
  - Ontological Gap
 - In elevating He bestows:
  - Grace 
  - Trinitarian Communion (participation in the divine nature)
  - Divine Filiation
  - Supernatural knowing & loving
  - Eternal Life
 - God wants to restore man when he rejects God's gifts and even damages his own being.
  - Moral Gap
 - In healing He bestows:
  - Reconciliation
  - Salvation/healing
  - Reintegration
  - Regathering into communion

#### Second Operative principle:
 - #def Trinitarian Christocentricity: the Triune God is revealed and encountered in Jesus Christ the Incarnate Word.
