#### Approaching ST 1.1.1 on sacred doctrine
---
#syst501 
2024-09-06, 10:05

---
NB:
 -  feedback on reading responses distributed
### Sacred doctrine and theology
1. need for divine teaching
	1. reasons mentioned in ScG
	2. etc. (take chad's notes)
	3. to join us ultimately to God
2. distinguishing Sacred Doctrine and theology
	1. sacred theology, doctrine, and scripture are all intellectually distinct, but highly related
3. theology as a science
	1. "scientia" = "knowledge", aristotelian notion of a science (having knowledge of principles, etc.)
	2. how is it a science?
		1. two kinds of science: principal, and subordinate science
			1. principal science has immediate knowledge of its principles
			2. subaltern/subordinate receives its principles from a higher science
		2. Something similar when it comes from sacred doctrine:
			1. Sacred doctrine proceeds from principles received from God and the blessed.
			2. What God reveals flows from what God knows, and what He knows exceeds what He reveals
			3. the received principles are the articles of faith
	3. unity and formality:
		1. Art. 3 & 7
		2. Is it one discipline? Yes
		3. What is the formality under which sacred theology studies its object?  On the formality of it being revealed.
		4. #def Theology: the reasoned study about God and things in relation to God on the basis of revelation for the purpose of coming to a greater understanding of these things, and in turn a greater love.
	4. purpose and nobility
		1. Art. 4 & 5
			1. Thomas will not deny that theology is practical, but human action is secondary.  Human action only qua action directed to God as end.  It is more speculative than moral as it is focused on God.
		2. speculative or practical? scripture contains both, and theology studies both -> God knows both simply. 
		4. Art. 5 Nobler than all the sciences:
			1. It transcends even the division between speculative and practical.
			2. This article admits of difficulties.  e.g. a failure to grasp first principles in this life, though in God we receive a more certain foundation than even those principles derived from human reason.
			3. What it treats is of higher worth than the other sciences
			4. The end of this knowledge is eternal bliss, that to which every other science aims.
4. theology as wisdom:
	1. Dominant note in ScG -> the task of the wise man, the project of wisdom.
	2. Art. 6
		1. This doctrine is wisdom above all human wisdom. Consideration of the highest matters on the basis of revealed knowledge from God.
		2. Wisdom is especially concerned with knowledge of divine things
		3. speculative contemplation + practical consultation (nice)
		4. There is wisdom from study, but _also_ wisdom as a gift of the Spirit.
			1. No distinguishing so as to divide, but so as to unite.
			2. Study of these things complimented by prayer
		5. The principles of the science: articles of faith.
### Summa 1, q1
1. Art. 1: Why: Purpose and necessity
2. Art. 2-7: What: scientific and sapiental character
3. Art 8-10: How: various modes in which it is given, recieved, studied, explained, etc.
	1. Art. 8: Argumentative mode of theology
	2. Art. 9 & 10: modes of communication in scripture

