Systematic Theology - Dr. Hahn
--
8/20/24
--
NB:
 - roll: stay in the same seats for first couple weeks for the sake of Dr. Hahn's memorization of names.

  -- Syllabus review
 - Office Hours by apptmt.
 - Email preferred LOC
 - *Dr. Hahn reads the syllabus verbatim* (almost)
 - Grades
  - Participation 10%
  - Reading responses 25%
   - Send via email in body of email, not attachment.
   - several sentences of reflective engagement
  - Two quizzes 9/27, 10/29 20% (10 each)
   - multiple choice / True False with correction for "False" answers
   - 20m each - probably at the end of a class session.
  - Paper 20%
   - Aquinas Paper Guidelines contained on pg. 7 of syllabus
   - paper on topic of choosing from ST 2a2ae 1-16
   - critical exposition of the text.
   - making connections to the surrounding / dependant texts in the 2a2ae
  - Final 25%
   - Time and Date TBD
 - Policies and Schedule:
  - Generally policies follow seminary handbook.
  - Absences - no distinction between excused/unexcused abscences
  - Technology - Use of laptops not permitted unless you get an exception - no cellphones.
 - Texts
  - Reqd. Canvas readings
  - the other six texts:
   - Bible
   - CCC
   - Main text: Finegold's Faith Comes From What Is Heard
   - Westminster handbook to TA
   - Dean Bouchard - Scripture Docs
   - The ST will be available online and on canvas.
   - The readings on canvas have been underlined :)
   - Avail thyself of the Canvas PDFs
   -"Background readings" are recommended
 - Schedule:
  - NB Fri 8/30/24
  - Working backwards from RFT - so Theology -> Faith -> Revelation
  - Oct 25 - PAPER DUE
[Thank God there are so many fewer papers this semester than I had last year in philosophy]

 -- Initial Introduction to Theology
 - Two Initial Definitions:
  - (the what) etymology: Theo + Logos -> Reasoning / Words / Study concerning GOD and related topics
  - (the how) Anselm: Fides quaerens intellectum - faith seeking understanding [didn't anselm take this from Augustine?]
   - Understanding is the end - this is the common ground with the etymological definition.
   - This is what is sought by theology. Later we might tweak this to "revelation seeking understanding"

 - (the why) Trent Cat: To know Christ and believe in His saving work.  To live in accord with God's law.  All is directed towards Charity. 

 -- Theology -> is the Reasoned study about God 
 		and things in relation to God, 
		on the basis of Faith, 
		for the purpose of coming to a greater understanding of these things, 
		and in turn a greater love.

 - The challenge and reward of theology:
  - The finding of Jesus in the temple:
   when Mary and Joseph can't find Our Lord
   they seek for three days and find Him in the temple
 - The study of theology is like the searching for a loved one who is missing
 - The seeking that flows from a longing is met with a finding
  it is as if Christ hides so that He can be sought and found
  to deepen the seeking and so in turn to deepen the finding
  the seeking is not necessarily pleasant.
  Mary keeps these things in her heart. 
 - The Church is tasked with witnessing to more than she can explain.
  - we do not come to an end of theology this side of death. The end is only contained in the beatific vision.
