Operative principles ctd. / Faith
---
#syst501
8/30/24
---
NB:

#### Review of reading questions:
1. Transmission of revelation: who is responsible:
    - The apostles and their successors (CCC 77-78, 85-86)
    - The whole church, i.e. all the faithful (CCC 84, 91-93)  Sensus Fidei/Fidelium
    - The Holy Ghost (CCC 78-79, 81, 94)
2. meaning of term "faith":
    - Deposit or body of truths (CCC84)
    - human act of believing, incl. free assent and obedience to revealed truth
    - capacitating divine gift (theological virtue of gift), which alone enables man to  
    perform the act of believeing
3. meaning of the term "reason":
    - the human act of reasoning, involving thought,  
    understanding, and formation of judgements via logic.
    - capacitating divine gift (the power of the intellect/reason)  
    which alone enables man to perform the act of reasoning
    - a deposit or body of truths held by or attained by reason (scientia? knowledge?)

    He used the term in all three definitions :/
    
4. Reasonability of faith
    - The supernatural act of faith is reasonable because belief of any sort is  
    reasonable when the one believed is trustworthy.
    - the theologival virtue of faith is reasonable inasmuch as it accords with  
    man's natural capacities as knower and lover, working to heal, perfect,  
    and elevate these capacities, and enabling man to attain to God as beatifying end.
    - the deposit of faith is reasonable in that they are in no way opposed to reason,  
    although they are avove reason and beyond its grasp because its source is the same  
    God who is the creator of reason and the naturally knowable world,  
    _Truth cannot contradict truth_
#### Fifth operative principle
    - #def fifth operative principle: although distinct, faith and reason are not opposed  
    becasue they have the same divine origin and the same focus on truth


#### consolidation of gains - the five principles backwards.
1. Harmony of faith and reason ccc 159
2. graced cooperation: man's response to, and attainment of God  
requires God's grace and assistance. ccc 155
3. instrumental mediation: God's ordinary way of reaching  
and teaching man is through other men. ccc 166-167
4. trinitarian christocentricity: thhe Triune God is fully revealed  
and encountered in Jesus Christ, the incarnate Son/Word CCC 151, 158
5. The fitting necessity of the sensible and the enunciable: man  
naturally comes to knowledge of things through the senses, especially  
via seeing/sensible vision and hearing/language ccc 170, 185
