
### Lity 501
---
#lity501
### 8/22/24
---
*Review of various posts*

#### Term: Mysterium
 - Used by Romans to describe oriental cults
 - gnostic cults
 - there was a dimension of secrecy in the church
  - this is different from the gnosticism of cults  
  out of discretion and to avoid the "contempt of the uninitiated"
 - This term appropriate to christian mysteries/sacraments
  - Mystery qua a thing incomprehensible without faith
  - vir insipiens non cognoscet, et stultus non intelleget haec.
  - Dan 2:18-30 - referring to the king's dream as a mystery
   - Daniel helped him to understand the mystery he saw
   - a revelation of God's plan - Christ bringing forth His kingdom
  - Eph 1:9, 3:3, 9; Rev 1:20 - Referring to the revealed plan of God in Christ
  - Patristic use: the mysteries of faith, esp. Paschal Mystery.
   - first use of "paschal mystery" 2nd C. AD St. Melito of Sardis
   - Tertullian and Jerome use "Sacramentum"
 - Mysterium came to refer to the spiritual realities hidden beneath the external forms
  - Sacramentum emphasized the actions which contained the "mysteria" - CCC 1075
  - In Latin, sacramentum tended to replace liturgia and mysterium which are of greek origin
  - the word mysterium came to be used to emphasize the mysteries of faith: trinity, passion, incarnation, etc.

#### What is the Liturgy?
 - the pacschal mystery (SC 7)
 - offering of the people of God and foretaste of heaven (CCC 1090)
 - Sacred actions and words that make the paschal mystery present (CCC 1140)
  - Action of Christ in union with members of His body. Action of Church in union with Christ, the Head.
  - St. Augustine "the Whole Christ"

#### Constituents of the Liturgy
1. The Mass
2. The Rites of the Sacraments
3. LotH -> Sanctification of time
4. The liturgical cycle -> sanctification of date
5. Funeral Rites
6. Sacramentals (distinct from popular piety)

#### Dimensions of the Liturgy
 - SC 16 outlines five aspects
  1. Historical - the incarnation happened in time, and the work of salvation continues in time
   - we seek to understand why liturgical practices began
   - we seek to perceive the work of the Holy Spirit in each period
   - See the living tradition and organic unity of the liturgy (until 1969?)
   - Gain a proper perspective on, learn from, and appreciate each liturgical period.
  2. Theological dimension
   - What is the revealed meaning of the Lity?
   - how does it reflect the church's theology?
   - didactic component of the liturgy - what does it teach catechetically?
   - how adequately does liturgy transmit faith in different periods/traditions?
  3. Spiritual - in harmony with the action of the Holy Ghost (DD 49)
   - The reason for the lity: redemption and sanctification
   - Lity is spiritual worship (Rom 12:1)
    - Active partitipation by the faithful - notably active engagement of mind/heart
    - "Actuosa" implies deep interior participation, not mere external action
    - The priest need be both presider and worshiper
  4. Pastoral - applying theological and spiritual principles for the good of people
   - leading parishioners to full participation (conscious, active, fruitful)
   - Utilizing legitimate diversity for the good of souls (?)
   - Leading people to the truth and love of God
  5. Juridical - laws, rubrics, norms, and avoidance of extremes
   - Rigidity or scrup. observance as more important than or the same as reverence
   - disregard of law or knowingly ignoring norms in the rite
   - Beautiful and sanctifying worship should be out goal (confusing externals as the end)

#### Overview of the Mass itself as celebrated today
 - Two parts of the Mass:
    1. Liturgy of Word
    2. Liturgy of Eucharist
 - These two parts were joined very early on
 - Lity of word and lity of Eucharist form "one single act of worship" (SC 56)
 - The road to Emmaus (Lk 24:13-32)
 - Connection between lity of word and lity of Eucharist
  - Mane nobiscum Domine, quoniam advesperacit.
 - Luke wrote his Gospel after the earliest celebrations of the Eucharist. (ca. 60-70 AD)

#### Liturgy of the Eucharist
 - Four actions:
  1. Took - Offertory
  2. Blessed - Consecration
  3. Broke - Fraction
  4. Gave - Communion
 - Same four-fold action at multiplication of loaves, Emmaus, and in every lit. trad. unto today.
 - See Canvas handout
