#### Early Christian things cotd.
---
#chur501
2024-09-05, 09:53

---
NB:
 -  
#### Christianity and Rome
1. Conflict over theology and state
2. Persecutions of Nero (AD 64)
3. Court trials
	1. Trajan: Letter from Pliny (AD 112)
	2. Hadrian (AD 117-138)
#### Christianity and Judaism
1. Identity of Christ and Mosaic Law
	1. Apostles were concerned with how to preach the Gospel and what to do about the Mosaic Law
2. Examples:
	1. Kerinthos
		1. inhabit Asia minor
		2. perhaps the reason John decided to write his Gospel to counter their poor Christology.  
		3. The two heresies they believed were Adoptionism and Docetism.  They believed that Jesus was the natural son of Mary and Joseph, and that the Son descended upon Jesus at His baptism, so that Jesus left the Jordan as the Christ.  The Son left Jesus when He died, and by returning to Him, effected the ressurection. (these guys are nuts.) (it's like a bad game of telephone?)
	2. Ebionites
		1. Dualist Christians: Jesus was consecrated by God as the messiah.  Nothing divine about Him, he's just a big boy prophet.
		2. Anti-Pauline, concentrated understanding of Jesus' mission on His preaching.
		3. Jesus came to preach and give people the pure form of the Mosaic Law
		4. Unconcerned with salvific element of His Crucifixion
3. This is the world in which the post-apostolic fathers are living and working.
	1. Wources for the history of the early church:
		1. Clement:
			1. Learned, cites scripture from memory
			2. Adapts stoic philosophy
		2. Ignatius of Antioch
			1. on his way to Rome to be tried and accused, he wrote a number of letters to communities.
		3. Polycarp of Smyrna
			1. From asia minor who apparently had contact with the apostle John
			2. a letter and a Vita (really a Passio) survives
		4. Didache:
			1. Syrian
			2. Provides an earliest christian rule of life
		5. Barnabus:
			1. One letter, perhaps spurious, barnabus = paul's companion?
			2. Barnabus is a jewish thinker critical of 1st c. judaism
			3. crankier than he is learned - the writing is a bit sloppy
		6. Shepherd of Hermus
			1. Hermus brother of Pius (2nd. C.)?
			2. Concerned with Jewish bg of Christianity and moral reform
			3. Not as critical of Jews as some of the others
	2. General themes: 
		1. Forms of Prayer
			1. OT in form
			2. seeing the beginnings of our kind of worship
			3. references to lit. prayer are more connected to Father
			4. private prayers more likely to address the Son
		2. Sacraments: central to Christian life - esp. Baptism, Eucharist.
			1. Trinitarian formula essential - notion of "sealing" important for early christians
			2. Eucharist can be seen in PA fathers to create and sustain the unity of the church
		3. Christocentricity
			1. they see the will of Christ as guiding christianity
			2. moving towards association between Christ and God's Law
#### Ecclesiology and Organization
1. Local churches
	1. Importance of christians being united in a local community seem to be a high priority
	2. Schism and heresy are presented as biggest enemies of early church
	3. Docetism a big problem in the east -> in order to try to reconcile Judaism with Christianity
2. Apostolic Succession
	1. Mentions of elders, deacons, priests - implying hierarchy being established
	2. idea of apostolic succession is promoted in a way that warms our ultramontanist hearts
	3. Implied in clement's letter and the different address in ignatius' letters to the Roman church over the other churches - some early churches even throw clement's letter into the bible.
### Roman Scrutiny of the Church
1. Persecutions
	1. The Christians were seen as atheistic and immoral because of their refusal to participate in Roman Cultus, and their secrecy
	2. Marcus Aurelius and Commodus
		1. Under these two leaders, the christians draw more attention to themselves because of their fights with the gnostics.
2. Literary Polemic
	1. The animosity of helenistic authors etc. led to a intellectual attack against christianity by the romans.  esp. Celsus AD 180
		1. This sparks great apologetic works, esp. those of Justin Martyr.
		2. Works of Celsus seen as most potent attacks on Christianity
		3. Even several generations after Celsus' death Christian writers are still refuting it (origin.)
		4. Celsus rejected the monotheistic claims, and supported roman cultus and mystery cults.  He preferred a kind of platonic dualism, and stoicism.  This prevented him from accepting Christian views on creation, revelation, and doctrine of salvation (soteriology)
### Christian Apologetics
1. A new form of Christian literature: a reasoned defense
2. Tailored Responses towards specific critics.
3. The ones contra Jewish critics tend to focus on Jesus as messiah, and connections between Jesus and OT prophesies
4. contra Romans/Hellenists focused on ethics.  Christian ethical approaches combating the charges of atheism and immorality.  "not only are we moral, but more romanly moral than other religions"
5. Justin Martyr (100-165): Anti-Gnostic
### Internal Disputation
1. Gnosticism
	1. Gnosticism target of most early christian writers.
	2. Gnostics not specific to christianity
	3. Dualist - good and bad in everything
	4. One of the greatest controversies is debate over Marcion, who is pushing gnostic doctrines in Rome. (110-160 AD)
		1. Marcion was wealthy and generous merchant in Rome
		2. Appears to hold dualistic idea of divinity
		3. Says, "hey, I get what's happening - the OT god is the bad god, and the NT god is the Good god.  So we should be reading NT with OT as good cop vs bad cop"
		4. the OT is some "bad Jew-Jew," guys.
		5. Loved the gospel of Luke, not so much Matthew(since Matthew speaks of fulfillment and continuity with OT)
		6. OT is only useful as point of contrast.
		7. Marcion got punted out of Roman Community after a while.
	8. Three emphases are determined:
		1. Apostolic origin: does this teaching go back to apostles / in accord with it
		2. Apostolic succession: are these leaders appointed by the apostles or their appointees
		3. Canon of Scripture: which books are authoritative?
2. Montanism